#Case study: The nuclear sector in the Japan 2050 Low Carbon Navigator
by Mustafa Moinuddin and Takeshi Kuramochi, Institute of Global Environmental Strategies (IGES)

##Introduction
Japan is at a crossroads in choosing its future energy and emissions reduction policies. The 2011 earthquake and subsequent accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant compelled the policymakers to rethink the country’s previously-adopted energy policy which was based on nuclear power as the mainstay of Japan’s energy supply. Ensuring Japan’s future energy security thus has become a major policy issue. At the same time, Japan’s commitment to reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 80 per cent (below the 1990s level) by 2050 is faced with challenges, since a decreased dependence on nuclear power has already increased Japan’s use of fossil fuels for power generation at least in the short term. The choices Japan faces now include, among others, whether to focus more on cutting its energy demand or relying more on decarbonising on the supply side, how to generate electricity, and what types of technologies to use.  

The Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) and the National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) jointly started working on developing the Japanese version of the 2050 Pathways Calculator in 2013 with technical support from the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) and the British Embassy Tokyo. The prototype of the Japanese version, known as Japan 2050 Low Carbon Navigator (Low Carbon Navigator), was pre-launched during a trial session with different stakeholders in May 2014. The full version was launched for the general public in July 2014. Two versions of the Low Carbon Navigator has been developed. An Excel version provides a complete picture of the model including data and underlying assumptions, and is useful for expert audience (the model can be downloaded from http://www.2050-low-carbon-navi.jp/web/en/). A more simplified Web Tool is for policy makers and general audience, and can be accessed at http://www.en-2050-low-carbon-navi.jp/.

The Low Carbon Navigator provides a platform for engaging in dialogues on the challenges and opportunities of the future energy system and the responses to climate change. This transparent and handy tool can help answer the key questions of how Japan’s energy system may evolve over the next few decades and how it will affect the country’s GHG emissions, energy security and import dependence, electricity systems, energy development and related costs. 

##Post-Fukushima uncertainties in Japan’s nuclear power sector

Japan has a long history of nuclear energy, dating back to the 1950s. Decades of aggressive deployment of nuclear energy made Japan a leading producer of nuclear power of the world both in terms of the total number of reactors and net electricity capacity. Before the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident in 2011, Japan’s nuclear sector had a capacity of 49 gigawatt (GW), which produced around 288 terawatt-hour (TWh) of electricity in 2010 (International Energy Agency, 2013). Not surprisingly, nuclear energy became a significant contributor to the country’s energy and electricity sector. For example, the nuclear sector accounted for around one-fourth of Japan’s total electricity generation in 2010 (Energy Data and Modelling Center, 2014). Nuclear power supported meeting Japan’s growing energy demands during the country’s rapid economic growth, and helped reduce the dependence on the import of conventional/fossil fuels. In addition, Japan’s ambitious emissions reduction targets have also been set assuming increasing dependence on nuclear power. 

Japan’s pre-Fukushima energy policy aimed for further expansion of nuclear power in the future. Japan’s 2010 Basic Energy Plan called for the construction of 14 new nuclear power plants between 2010 and 2030—this in addition to the 54 reactors already existing (Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry of Japan, 2010). This nuclear power expansion plan would have increased the installed capacity from 49 GW in 2010 to 68 GW in 2030, and the electricity generation from 288 TWh in 2010 to around 540 TWh, or nearly half of total centralized power generation (from “general electric utilities”) in 2030 (Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry of Japan, 2010).

However, Japan’s nuclear power sector received a major blow when the 2011 earthquake and the resulting Tsunami severely damaged the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. The disaster raised safety concerns of other nuclear plants in Japan, which prompted the government to enact stringent safety regulations and to initiate temporary shutdown of all the existing plants for inspection. As of April 2015, none of Japan’s nuclear power stations are in operation. Consequently, for the first time in several decades, Japan is now generating power without any contribution from the nuclear sector. The gap has been filled up with imported fossil fuels with implications for Japan’s import dependence as well as energy costs.

Some drastic changes in the country’s nuclear power production are expected. Two major policy decisions will affect the future of Japan’s nuclear energy. The first one is related to the restart policy of the existing nuclear power plants. The second issue concerns the impact of new-build policy on future capacity. These policies are likely to be decisive in Japan’s future energy supply mix, and hence will have significant consequences for the country’s energy security, self-sufficiency and import dependence, and emissions reduction efforts. 

##Assumptions and trajectory setting

Against the changing landscape of Japan’s energy sector in general and nuclear sector in particular, the Low Carbon Navigator development team felt that the nuclear energy supply trajectories should reflect the challenges that Japan faces now. Thus the ensuing levers under this sector need to incorporate options beyond mere generation capacity potential. We therefore took a unique approach to allow the users to reflect their opinions through the Low Carbon Navigator’s levers under the nuclear sector.

The trajectories have been set up on the basis of progressively higher efforts toward transition to a low-carbon society. For example, Trajectory A in the nuclear sector represents low efforts and continuation of existing capacity and technology, whereas Trajectory D represents great efforts leading toward increased use advanced technology. Trajectory E in nuclear power generation represents the physical limit/technological potential. 

##Impact of restart policy

The restart policy affects all the existing nuclear plants in operation before the Fukushima accident. For Fukushima Daiichi and Daini plants, it is clear that all the reactors will be decommissioned. However, for other plants (i.e. not in Fukushima) that were hit by the earthquake in 2011 and currently under temporary shutdown, the question is whether they will resume operations in the future or whether they will be decommissioned. For the plants which were not hit by the earthquake, the question is when they will resume operations. These are difficult questions but are important in formulating Japan’s future nuclear energy pathways. Based on these, the Low Carbon Navigator has developed the following five trajectories. The users of the Low Carbon Navigator will be able to input their opinion by choosing their preferred restart policy and see its effect on Japan’s energy and emissions future. The users can choose among complete abandonment of nuclear capacity, limited restart or full restart. The options for restart policy also differentiate the plants according to plants’ lifespan (40 years, 50 years, or 60 years). Currently, the lifetime of existing nuclear reactors is regulated to 40 years. The reactors may extend their lifetime by another 20 years only if they pass the special examination by Japan’s Nuclear Regulation Authority. By combining the lifespan input with the other lever (i.e. new build policy) the users can reflect their views on phasing out nuclear power generation some time in the future. Five different trajectories are provided under this lever, which are explained below along with the illustration in Figure 1. 

###Trajectory A
Trajectory A assumes that Japan will shut down all of its nuclear power plants from 2010 onwards and they will never be restarted. In other words Japan will phase out its nuclear capacity completely and focus on other sources of energy. 

###Trajectory B
Trajectory B for restart policy assumes that only half of the existing nuclear plants will be restarted. With no new-build rate, nuclear capacity will come down from 49 GW in 2010 to below 10 GW in 2030 and to zero by 2050.

###Trajectory C
Trajectory C assumes a restart policy where Japan only allows all existing nuclear plants with a 40 year lifespan to operate. With the retirement of exhausted plants and no new-build, Japan’s capacity will gradually decline, but at a slower pace than Trajectory B. By 2030, capacity will be around 19 GW and eventually zero by 2050.

###Trajectory E
Trajectory E assumes the most aggressive new-build policy. The operation of new-builds will take place from 2035 with a new capacity installation rate of 2 GW/y from 2040 onwards. It will mean that with full restart policy (40 year lifespan) Japan’s nuclear capacity will be 29.1 GW in 2050. The resulting generation will be 208 TWh/y. Thus, even with the most optimistic assumptions, nuclear power will only contribute to less than one-third of Japan’s total electricity generation in 2050.
Together with the restart policy lever, the new-build policy lever helps the users to input their views on the extent of emphasis Japan should give on the nuclear sector. For example, even with a full restart policy, Japan will eventually phase out its nuclear capacity if a user selects no new build option (Trajectory A). This will mean that unless the country puts significant effort in developing the renewables sector, its dependence on fossil fuels will increase significantly, resulting in increased import dependence as well as higher level of emissions from the fuels. On the other hand, if a user chooses an aggressive new-build policy, for example, Trajectory D, then nuclear power will continue to be a major contributor in Japan’s energy and electricity sector, and in controlling the country’s GHG emissions as well as import dependence.

###Data and calculation procedures
All these trajectories have been developed after rigorous review of existing literature and then through feedback from several expert review meetings. The trajectory assumptions interact with the fixed assumptions under this sector. Fixed assumptions are also based on existing literature and data, and include own-use requirements (as percentage of generated electricity), average transmission loss, thermal efficiency (based on gross calorific values), and legacy plant capacities (built prior to 2010). In addition to the trajectories and fixed assumptions, the Low Carbon Navigator also includes five load factor assumptions ranging from negative to aggressive. 

###Cost assumptions
Although the Low Carbon Navigator does not adopt a cost-optimisation approach, it allows the users to see the incremental cost to the society of their chosen pathways, and to make sensitivity analysis by comparing the costs of their selected pathways with other pathways.

Six different types of costs have been assumed for the nuclear sector: capital cost, fixed operating cost, cost of uranium (including spent fuel recycling), decommissioning cost, safety cost, and cost for policy measures. All these cost categories and reference data come from governmental sources (Cost Committee Report of Japan’s National Policy Unit). For each category, the Low Carbon Navigator provides low, point (average) and high estimates of costs. However, costs are assumed to be time-invariant in the sense that under each of the three estimates, the costs remain the same throughout the period from 2010 to 2050. Biggest differences are assumed among the three estimates for capital cost, whereas for other categories of costs, differences are minimal or negligible. Table 1 provides the data under the six cost categories and under the three estimates.

##Conclusion
The Japan 2050 Low Carbon Navigator has been developed to demonstrate the scale of changes that are likely to be required for Japan to make the transition to a low carbon economy. The Low Carbon Navigator takes into account all the energy supply and demand sectors. This brief report focuses exclusively on how the nuclear power sector has been incorporated in the Low Carbon Navigator. With uncertainties surrounding the future of Japan’s nuclear sector, a number of complex, unprecedented issues need to be taken into account for developing the trajectories and making the assumptions within the Low Carbon Navigator model. These assumptions and trajectories are very different from the ones in the other energy supply sector. This report attempted to explains these issues, highlighting the complexities and uniqueness of the nuclear energy sector in the Low Carbon Navigator. 
